README.md, before:

![poster](assets/poster.png)

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi/pulls">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/PRs-welcome-brightgreen.svg?longCache=true" alt="Pull Requests">
  </a>
  <a href="LICENSE">
      <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg?longCache=true" alt="MIT License">
    </a>
</p>

# LearnMCP-xAPI

LearnMCP-xAPI is an open-source MCP (Model Context Protocol) server that enables AI agents to record and retrieve learning activities through xAPI-compliant Learning Record Stores. Unlike traditional educational AI tools that focus on content generation or automated grading, LearnMCP-xAPI creates a bridge between AI interactions and learning analytics, allowing intelligent systems to build contextual understanding of what learners know, practice, and achieve.

This project addresses a fundamental gap in AI-powered education: the ability for AI agents to maintain persistent, structured records of learning progress that can inform future interactions and provide evidence of skill development. Whether you're building AI tutoring systems, personalized learning assistants, or educational analytics platforms, LearnMCP-xAPI provides the infrastructure to make AI interactions learning-aware.

> **Important Note:** LearnMCP-xAPI is designed as a foundational component for educational technology systems. It enables AI agents to participate meaningfully in the learning process by maintaining awareness of student progress, but it does not replace thoughtful pedagogical design or human educational expertise.

<p align="center">
    <a href="https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi/issues/new?assignees=&labels=bug&projects=&template=bug_report.md&title=%5BBUG%5D">Report Bug</a>
    ·
    <a href="https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi/issues/new?assignees=&labels=enhancement&projects=&template=feature_request.md&title=%5BREQUEST%5D">Request Feature</a>
    ·
    <a href="https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi/wiki">Wiki</a>
  </p>

## Table of Contents

[Motivation](#motivation)

[How LearnMCP-xAPI Works](#how-learnmcp-xapi-works)

[Key Features](#key-features)

[Architecture Overview](#architecture-overview)

[Getting Started](#getting-started)

[Integration Guides](#integration-guides)

[License](#license)

[Contributing](#contributing)

## Motivation

The current landscape of AI in education is dominated by familiar patterns: pre-made prompts, automated content generation, and the eternal struggle between students wanting AI to do their work and teachers trying to prevent exactly that. This approach treats AI as either a shortcut or an obstacle, missing the transformative potential of intelligent systems that can genuinely support learning.

The inspiration for LearnMCP-xAPI came from observing this fundamental disconnect. Most educational AI tools operate in isolation—they generate responses, create activities, or analyze text, but they don't learn from or contribute to a student's ongoing educational journey. There's no memory of what a student has practiced, struggled with, or mastered. Each interaction starts from zero.

Learning Record Stores (LRS) and the xAPI specification have long provided a solution for capturing and analyzing learning activities, but they've remained largely disconnected from the AI systems that are increasingly central to educational experiences. LearnMCP-xAPI bridges this gap by enabling AI agents to both contribute to and learn from comprehensive learning records.

This approach opens possibilities that go far beyond traditional AI tutoring:

- **Adaptive AI Companions**: AI assistants that adjust their explanations based on what a student has previously learned and where they've struggled.
- **Evidence-Based Assessment**: Teachers can gather authentic evidence of learning from natural AI interactions rather than artificial testing scenarios.
- **Personalized Learning Pathways**: AI systems that recommend next steps based on comprehensive learning histories.
- **Cross-Platform Learning Continuity**: Students' learning progress follows them across different AI-powered educational tools.

The goal isn't to replace human teachers or traditional learning methods, but to create AI systems that can meaningfully participate in the learning process—understanding context, building on prior knowledge, and contributing to a richer, more personalized educational experience.

## How LearnMCP-xAPI Works

LearnMCP-xAPI implements the Model Context Protocol (MCP) to create a seamless connection between AI agents and learning analytics infrastructure. The system operates as a bridge, translating natural language learning interactions into structured xAPI statements while providing AI agents with contextual awareness of student progress.

1. **AI Agent Integration**: Through MCP, AI agents gain access to three core learning tools: statement recording, progress retrieval, and activity vocabulary management.

2. **Natural Language Processing**: LearnMCP-xAPI enables two complementary approaches to learning activity capture:
   - **Explicit Learning Activities**: When students directly mention their learning—"I practiced Python loops today" or "I'm struggling with quadratic equations"—the AI agent converts these into structured statements.
   - **Implicit Learning Evidence**: AI agents can analyze conversations to identify demonstrated knowledge or gaps, automatically recording evidence like "Student successfully explained recursion concepts" or "Student showed confusion with database joins" based on the natural flow of educational dialogue.

3. **xAPI Statement Generation**: LearnMCP-xAPI transforms learning activities into xAPI-compliant statements that include the learner (actor), the activity (verb + object), context, and results. These statements conform to educational data standards and can include scores, completion status, and additional metadata.

4. **Learning Record Store Integration**: Statements are securely stored in any xAPI 1.0.3 compliant LRS. The system handles authentication, validation, and error recovery automatically.

5. **Contextual Retrieval**: AI agents can query learning histories to understand what students have practiced, achieved, or struggled with. This enables responses that build on prior knowledge and address individual learning needs.

6. **Privacy-Preserving Design**: Each student receives a unique identifier (ACTOR_UUID) that separates their learning records while maintaining privacy. No personal information is stored—only learning activities and progress indicators.

This architecture enables AI systems to participate in the complete learning cycle: they can understand where students are coming from, contribute meaningful educational interactions, and build evidence of learning progress that benefits both students and educators.

## Key Features

- **xAPI 1.0.3 Compliance**: Full compatibility with the xAPI specification ensures interoperability with existing educational technology ecosystems,
- **MCP Integration**: Native support for the Model Context Protocol enables seamless AI agent connectivity.
- **Plugin Architecture**: Extensible plugin system supporting multiple Learning Record Stores with easy configuration switching.
- **Multiple LRS Support**: Built-in support for LRS SQL and Ralph LRS, with architecture designed for easy addition of new LRS implementations.
- **Flexible Authentication**: Support for various authentication methods including Basic Auth and OIDC (OpenID Connect) depending on LRS requirements.
- **Privacy by Design**: Student identifiers are configurable and separate from personal information, ensuring educational data privacy.
- **Intelligent Statement Generation**: Automatically converts natural language learning activities into structured xAPI statements with appropriate scoring and context.
- **Contextual Learning Queries**: AI agents can retrieve filtered learning histories to understand student progress and adapt their responses.
- **Retry Logic and Error Handling**: Robust network handling ensures reliable communication with Learning Record Stores.
- **Educational Vocabulary Management**: Built-in support for common learning verbs (practiced, mastered, experienced, achieved) with extensible architecture.
- **Multi-Student Support**: Simple configuration enables deployment across classrooms, institutions, or individual learners.
- **Real-Time Learning Analytics**: Immediate availability of learning data for adaptive AI responses and educational insights.

## Architecture Overview

LearnMCP-xAPI follows a modular plugin architecture designed for educational technology integration and extensibility.

**Core Components:**

- **MCP Tools Layer**: Exposes learning functionality to AI agents through standardized MCP protocol.
- **xAPI Statement Engine**: Converts learning activities into compliant xAPI statements with proper validation.
- **Plugin System**: Extensible architecture supporting multiple LRS implementations through a unified interface.
- **LRS Plugins**: Dedicated plugins for different Learning Record Stores (LRS SQL, Ralph LRS) with specialized authentication and communication handling.
- **Privacy Management**: Ensures secure handling of student identifiers and learning data.
- **Configuration System**: Flexible environment and file-based configuration with plugin selection and management.

**Supported Learning Record Stores:**

- **LRS SQL**: SQLite-based lightweight LRS ideal for development and small deployments
- **Ralph LRS**: Enterprise-grade LRS by France Université Numérique with support for Basic Auth and OIDC authentication
- **Plugin Architecture**: Designed for easy addition of new LRS implementations without modifying core code

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

Before starting, ensure you have:
- Python 3.8 or higher
- Access to an xAPI-compliant Learning Record Store (we recommend [LRS SQL](https://github.com/yetanalytics/lrsql) for development)
- An MCP-compatible client (such as Claude Desktop)

### Installation

#### Option 1: Install from source

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi.git
cd learnmcp-xapi

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

#### Option 2: Install with venv

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi.git
cd learnmcp-xapi

# Create and activate a virtual environment
python -m venv learnmcp-env
source learnmcp-env/bin/activate  # On Windows: learnmcp-env\Scripts\activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

#### Option 3: Install with uv

```bash
# Install uv if you don't have it
pip install uv

# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi.git
cd learnmcp-xapi

# Create and activate a virtual environment
uv venv
source .venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate

# Install dependencies
uv pip install -r requirements.txt
```

#### Option 4: Use Docker

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi.git
cd learnmcp-xapi

# Build the Docker image
docker build -t learnmcp-xapi:1.0 .

# Run with environment variables
docker run -p 8000:8000 \
  -e LRS_ENDPOINT=http://localhost:8080 \
  -e LRS_KEY=your-lrs-key \
  -e LRS_SECRET=your-lrs-secret \
  -e ACTOR_UUID=student-unique-id-here \
  learnmcp-xapi:1.0
```

### Configuration

LearnMCP-xAPI uses a flexible configuration system supporting both environment variables and configuration files.

#### Basic Setup (Environment Variables)

Copy the example configuration file and customize it for your setup:

```bash
cp .env.example .env
```

Edit the `.env` file with your LRS plugin selection and student identifier:

```bash
# Required: Choose your LRS plugin
LRS_PLUGIN=lrsql  # Options: lrsql, ralph

# Required: Unique identifier for each student
ACTOR_UUID=student-12345-67890-abcdef

# LRS SQL Configuration (when LRS_PLUGIN=lrsql)
LRSQL_ENDPOINT=http://localhost:8080
LRSQL_KEY=your-api-key
LRSQL_SECRET=your-api-secret

# Ralph LRS Configuration (when LRS_PLUGIN=ralph)
RALPH_ENDPOINT=http://localhost:8100
RALPH_USERNAME=your-username  # For Basic Auth
RALPH_PASSWORD=your-password  # For Basic Auth
# OR for OIDC:
# RALPH_OIDC_TOKEN_URL=http://keycloak:8080/auth/realms/test/protocol/openid-connect/token
# RALPH_OIDC_CLIENT_ID=ralph
# RALPH_OIDC_CLIENT_SECRET=secret
```

#### Advanced Setup (Configuration Files)

For more complex deployments, you can use configuration files:

```bash
# Create configuration directory structure
mkdir -p config/plugins

# Create LRS-specific configuration files
echo "endpoint: \${LRSQL_ENDPOINT:-http://localhost:8080}
key: \${LRSQL_KEY}
secret: \${LRSQL_SECRET}
timeout: 30
retry_attempts: 3" > config/plugins/lrsql.yaml

echo "endpoint: \${RALPH_ENDPOINT:-http://localhost:8100}
username: \${RALPH_USERNAME}
password: \${RALPH_PASSWORD}
oidc_token_url: \${RALPH_OIDC_TOKEN_URL}
oidc_client_id: \${RALPH_OIDC_CLIENT_ID}
oidc_client_secret: \${RALPH_OIDC_CLIENT_SECRET}
timeout: 30
retry_attempts: 3" > config/plugins/ralph.yaml
```

See `.env.example` for all available configuration options and plugin-specific settings.

### Quick Test

```bash
# Start the MCP server
python -m learnmcp_xapi.main
```

You should see a response indicating the server is starting.

## Integration Guides

LearnMCP-xAPI supports multiple Learning Record Stores through its plugin architecture, making it easy to integrate with your existing educational technology infrastructure.

### Learning Record Store Integration

#### LRS SQL (Default)
LRS SQL is a lightweight, SQLite-based Learning Record Store perfect for development and small deployments:

```bash
# Set plugin to lrsql (default)
LRS_PLUGIN=lrsql
LRSQL_ENDPOINT=http://localhost:8080
LRSQL_KEY=your-api-key
LRSQL_SECRET=your-api-secret
```

- **[LRS SQL Setup Guide](https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi/wiki/SQL-LRS-Setup)** - Complete setup guide for development environments

#### Ralph LRS (Enterprise)
Ralph LRS is an enterprise-grade Learning Record Store developed by France Université Numérique:

```bash
# Set plugin to ralph
LRS_PLUGIN=ralph
RALPH_ENDPOINT=http://localhost:8100

# Basic Authentication
RALPH_USERNAME=your-username
RALPH_PASSWORD=your-password

# OR OIDC Authentication (preferred for production)
RALPH_OIDC_TOKEN_URL=http://keycloak:8080/auth/realms/test/protocol/openid-connect/token
RALPH_OIDC_CLIENT_ID=ralph
RALPH_OIDC_CLIENT_SECRET=secret
```

- **Authentication Methods**: Ralph plugin automatically detects and uses the appropriate authentication method based on configuration
- **OIDC Support**: Full OpenID Connect support with automatic token management and refresh

#### Custom LRS Integration
The plugin architecture makes it easy to add support for new Learning Record Stores. See our [Plugin Development Guide](https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi/wiki/Plugin-Development) for details.

### AI Client Integration
- **[Claude Desktop Setup](https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi/wiki/Claude-Desktop-Setup)** - Step-by-step guide for connecting Claude Desktop as your AI learning companion
- More client integrations coming soon...

## Future Development

LearnMCP-xAPI is under active development with planned improvements including:

- **Additional LRS Plugins**: Support for more Learning Record Stores including TinCan API, xAPI Wrapper, and enterprise platforms.
- **Enhanced Authentication**: Support for additional authentication methods including JWT, OAuth 2.0, and certificate-based authentication.
- **Expanded Integration Testing**: Comprehensive compatibility testing and setup guides for additional Learning Record Stores and MCP clients.
- **Live Demo Environment**: Interactive demonstration platform where users can test LearnMCP-xAPI functionality without local setup.
- **Educational Assessment Templates**: Pre-built system prompts that enable AI agents to record learning evidence according to specific curriculum standards, evaluation criteria, and educational legislation requirements.
- **Interchangeable Learning Profiles**: Dynamic profile system where AI agents can retrieve assessment criteria and recording formats directly from the MCP server, eliminating the need for manual prompt configuration.

## License

LearnMCP-xAPI is released under the [MIT License](https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi/blob/main/LICENSE). You are free to use, modify, and distribute the code for both commercial and non-commercial purposes.

## Contributing

Contributions to LearnMCP-xAPI are welcome! Whether you're improving the code, enhancing the documentation, or suggesting new features, your input is valuable. Please check out the [CONTRIBUTING.md](https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md) file for guidelines on how to get started and make your contributions count.

We're particularly interested in:
- **New LRS Plugins**: Implementing support for additional Learning Record Stores using our plugin architecture
- **Authentication Methods**: Adding support for new authentication protocols and security standards
- **Plugin Testing**: Comprehensive testing of existing and new plugin implementations
- **MCP Client Examples**: New MCP client implementations and integration examples
- **Educational Use Cases**: Real-world use case studies and best practices documentation
- **Performance Optimizations**: Improvements to plugin performance and resource utilization

Commit message:

add veracity plugin and test and code refactor

README.md, after:

![poster](assets/poster.png)

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi/pulls">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/PRs-welcome-brightgreen.svg?longCache=true" alt="Pull Requests">
  </a>
  <a href="LICENSE">
      <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg?longCache=true" alt="MIT License">
    </a>
</p>

# LearnMCP-xAPI

LearnMCP-xAPI is an open-source MCP (Model Context Protocol) server that enables AI agents to record and retrieve learning activities through xAPI-compliant Learning Record Stores. Unlike traditional educational AI tools that focus on content generation or automated grading, LearnMCP-xAPI creates a bridge between AI interactions and learning analytics, allowing intelligent systems to build contextual understanding of what learners know, practice, and achieve.

This project addresses a fundamental gap in AI-powered education: the ability for AI agents to maintain persistent, structured records of learning progress that can inform future interactions and provide evidence of skill development. Whether you're building AI tutoring systems, personalized learning assistants, or educational analytics platforms, LearnMCP-xAPI provides the infrastructure to make AI interactions learning-aware.

> **Important Note:** LearnMCP-xAPI is designed as a foundational component for educational technology systems. It enables AI agents to participate meaningfully in the learning process by maintaining awareness of student progress, but it does not replace thoughtful pedagogical design or human educational expertise.

<p align="center">
    <a href="https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi/issues/new?assignees=&labels=bug&projects=&template=bug_report.md&title=%5BBUG%5D">Report Bug</a>
    ·
    <a href="https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi/issues/new?assignees=&labels=enhancement&projects=&template=feature_request.md&title=%5BREQUEST%5D">Request Feature</a>
    ·
    <a href="https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi/wiki">Wiki</a>
  </p>

## Table of Contents

[Motivation](#motivation)

[How LearnMCP-xAPI Works](#how-learnmcp-xapi-works)

[Key Features](#key-features)

[Architecture Overview](#architecture-overview)

[Getting Started](#getting-started)

[Integration Guides](#integration-guides)

[License](#license)

[Contributing](#contributing)

## Motivation

The current landscape of AI in education is dominated by familiar patterns: pre-made prompts, automated content generation, and the eternal struggle between students wanting AI to do their work and teachers trying to prevent exactly that. This approach treats AI as either a shortcut or an obstacle, missing the transformative potential of intelligent systems that can genuinely support learning.

The inspiration for LearnMCP-xAPI came from observing this fundamental disconnect. Most educational AI tools operate in isolation—they generate responses, create activities, or analyze text, but they don't learn from or contribute to a student's ongoing educational journey. There's no memory of what a student has practiced, struggled with, or mastered. Each interaction starts from zero.

Learning Record Stores (LRS) and the xAPI specification have long provided a solution for capturing and analyzing learning activities, but they've remained largely disconnected from the AI systems that are increasingly central to educational experiences. LearnMCP-xAPI bridges this gap by enabling AI agents to both contribute to and learn from comprehensive learning records.

This approach opens possibilities that go far beyond traditional AI tutoring:

- **Adaptive AI Companions**: AI assistants that adjust their explanations based on what a student has previously learned and where they've struggled.
- **Evidence-Based Assessment**: Teachers can gather authentic evidence of learning from natural AI interactions rather than artificial testing scenarios.
- **Personalized Learning Pathways**: AI systems that recommend next steps based on comprehensive learning histories.
- **Cross-Platform Learning Continuity**: Students' learning progress follows them across different AI-powered educational tools.

The goal isn't to replace human teachers or traditional learning methods, but to create AI systems that can meaningfully participate in the learning process—understanding context, building on prior knowledge, and contributing to a richer, more personalized educational experience.

## How LearnMCP-xAPI Works

LearnMCP-xAPI implements the Model Context Protocol (MCP) to create a seamless connection between AI agents and learning analytics infrastructure. The system operates as a bridge, translating natural language learning interactions into structured xAPI statements while providing AI agents with contextual awareness of student progress.

1. **AI Agent Integration**: Through MCP, AI agents gain access to three core learning tools: statement recording, progress retrieval, and activity vocabulary management.

2. **Natural Language Processing**: LearnMCP-xAPI enables two complementary approaches to learning activity capture:
   - **Explicit Learning Activities**: When students directly mention their learning—"I practiced Python loops today" or "I'm struggling with quadratic equations"—the AI agent converts these into structured statements.
   - **Implicit Learning Evidence**: AI agents can analyze conversations to identify demonstrated knowledge or gaps, automatically recording evidence like "Student successfully explained recursion concepts" or "Student showed confusion with database joins" based on the natural flow of educational dialogue.

3. **xAPI Statement Generation**: LearnMCP-xAPI transforms learning activities into xAPI-compliant statements that include the learner (actor), the activity (verb + object), context, and results. These statements conform to educational data standards and can include scores, completion status, and additional metadata.

4. **Learning Record Store Integration**: Statements are securely stored in any xAPI 1.0.3 compliant LRS. The system handles authentication, validation, and error recovery automatically.

5. **Contextual Retrieval**: AI agents can query learning histories to understand what students have practiced, achieved, or struggled with. This enables responses that build on prior knowledge and address individual learning needs.

6. **Privacy-Preserving Design**: Each student receives a unique identifier (ACTOR_UUID) that separates their learning records while maintaining privacy. No personal information is stored—only learning activities and progress indicators.

This architecture enables AI systems to participate in the complete learning cycle: they can understand where students are coming from, contribute meaningful educational interactions, and build evidence of learning progress that benefits both students and educators.

## Key Features

- **xAPI 1.0.3 Compliance**: Full compatibility with the xAPI specification ensures interoperability with existing educational technology ecosystems,
- **MCP Integration**: Native support for the Model Context Protocol enables seamless AI agent connectivity.
- **Plugin Architecture**: Extensible plugin system supporting multiple Learning Record Stores with easy configuration switching.
- **Multiple LRS Support**: Built-in support for LRS SQL and Ralph LRS, with architecture designed for easy addition of new LRS implementations.
- **Flexible Authentication**: Support for various authentication methods including Basic Auth and OIDC (OpenID Connect) depending on LRS requirements.
- **Privacy by Design**: Student identifiers are configurable and separate from personal information, ensuring educational data privacy.
- **Intelligent Statement Generation**: Automatically converts natural language learning activities into structured xAPI statements with appropriate scoring and context.
- **Contextual Learning Queries**: AI agents can retrieve filtered learning histories to understand student progress and adapt their responses.
- **Retry Logic and Error Handling**: Robust network handling ensures reliable communication with Learning Record Stores.
- **Educational Vocabulary Management**: Built-in support for common learning verbs (practiced, mastered, experienced, achieved) with extensible architecture.
- **Multi-Student Support**: Simple configuration enables deployment across classrooms, institutions, or individual learners.
- **Real-Time Learning Analytics**: Immediate availability of learning data for adaptive AI responses and educational insights.

## Architecture Overview

LearnMCP-xAPI follows a modular plugin architecture designed for educational technology integration and extensibility.

**Core Components:**

- **MCP Tools Layer**: Exposes learning functionality to AI agents through standardized MCP protocol.
- **xAPI Statement Engine**: Converts learning activities into compliant xAPI statements with proper validation.
- **Plugin System**: Extensible architecture supporting multiple LRS implementations through a unified interface.
- **LRS Plugins**: Dedicated plugins for different Learning Record Stores (LRS SQL, Ralph LRS) with specialized authentication and communication handling.
- **Privacy Management**: Ensures secure handling of student identifiers and learning data.
- **Configuration System**: Flexible environment and file-based configuration with plugin selection and management.

**Supported Learning Record Stores:**

- **LRS SQL**: SQLite-based lightweight LRS ideal for development and small deployments
- **Ralph LRS**: Enterprise-grade LRS by France Université Numérique with support for Basic Auth and OIDC authentication
- **Veracity Learning**: Cloud or self-hosted xAPI-compliant LRS with full 1.0.3 specification support and advanced analytics
- **Plugin Architecture**: Designed for easy addition of new LRS implementations without modifying core code

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

Before starting, ensure you have:
- Python 3.8 or higher
- Access to an xAPI-compliant Learning Record Store (we recommend [LRS SQL](https://github.com/yetanalytics/lrsql) for development)
- An MCP-compatible client (such as Claude Desktop)

### Installation

#### Option 1: Install from source

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi.git
cd learnmcp-xapi

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

#### Option 2: Install with venv

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi.git
cd learnmcp-xapi

# Create and activate a virtual environment
python -m venv learnmcp-env
source learnmcp-env/bin/activate  # On Windows: learnmcp-env\Scripts\activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

#### Option 3: Install with uv

```bash
# Install uv if you don't have it
pip install uv

# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi.git
cd learnmcp-xapi

# Create and activate a virtual environment
uv venv
source .venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate

# Install dependencies
uv pip install -r requirements.txt
```

#### Option 4: Use Docker

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi.git
cd learnmcp-xapi

# Build the Docker image
docker build -t learnmcp-xapi:1.0 .

# Run with environment variables
docker run -p 8000:8000 \
  -e LRS_ENDPOINT=http://localhost:8080 \
  -e LRS_KEY=your-lrs-key \
  -e LRS_SECRET=your-lrs-secret \
  -e ACTOR_UUID=student-unique-id-here \
  learnmcp-xapi:1.0
```

### Configuration

LearnMCP-xAPI uses a flexible configuration system supporting both environment variables and configuration files.

#### Basic Setup (Environment Variables)

Copy the example configuration file and customize it for your setup:

```bash
cp .env.example .env
```

Edit the `.env` file with your LRS plugin selection and student identifier:

```bash
# Required: Choose your LRS plugin
LRS_PLUGIN=lrsql  # Options: lrsql, ralph, veracity

# Required: Unique identifier for each student
ACTOR_UUID=student-12345-67890-abcdef

# LRS SQL Configuration (when LRS_PLUGIN=lrsql)
LRSQL_ENDPOINT=http://localhost:8080
LRSQL_KEY=your-api-key
LRSQL_SECRET=your-api-secret

# Ralph LRS Configuration (when LRS_PLUGIN=ralph)
RALPH_ENDPOINT=http://localhost:8100
RALPH_USERNAME=your-username  # For Basic Auth
RALPH_PASSWORD=your-password  # For Basic Auth
# OR for OIDC:
# RALPH_OIDC_TOKEN_URL=http://keycloak:8080/auth/realms/test/protocol/openid-connect/token
# RALPH_OIDC_CLIENT_ID=ralph
# RALPH_OIDC_CLIENT_SECRET=secret

# Veracity LRS Configuration (when LRS_PLUGIN=veracity)
VERACITY_ENDPOINT=https://your-lrs.lrs.io  # Do NOT include /xapi at the end
VERACITY_USERNAME=your-access-key-username
VERACITY_PASSWORD=your-access-key-password
```

#### Advanced Setup (Configuration Files)

For more complex deployments, you can use configuration files:

```bash
# Create configuration directory structure
mkdir -p config/plugins

# Create LRS-specific configuration files
echo "endpoint: \${LRSQL_ENDPOINT:-http://localhost:8080}
key: \${LRSQL_KEY}
secret: \${LRSQL_SECRET}
timeout: 30
retry_attempts: 3" > config/plugins/lrsql.yaml

echo "endpoint: \${RALPH_ENDPOINT:-http://localhost:8100}
username: \${RALPH_USERNAME}
password: \${RALPH_PASSWORD}
oidc_token_url: \${RALPH_OIDC_TOKEN_URL}
oidc_client_id: \${RALPH_OIDC_CLIENT_ID}
oidc_client_secret: \${RALPH_OIDC_CLIENT_SECRET}
timeout: 30
retry_attempts: 3" > config/plugins/ralph.yaml
```

See `.env.example` for all available configuration options and plugin-specific settings.

### Quick Test

```bash
# Start the MCP server
python -m learnmcp_xapi.main
```

You should see a response indicating the server is starting.

## Integration Guides

LearnMCP-xAPI supports multiple Learning Record Stores through its plugin architecture, making it easy to integrate with your existing educational technology infrastructure.

### Learning Record Store Integration

#### LRS SQL (Default)
LRS SQL is a lightweight, SQLite-based Learning Record Store perfect for development and small deployments:

```bash
# Set plugin to lrsql (default)
LRS_PLUGIN=lrsql
LRSQL_ENDPOINT=http://localhost:8080
LRSQL_KEY=your-api-key
LRSQL_SECRET=your-api-secret
```

- **[LRS SQL Setup Guide](https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi/wiki/SQL-LRS-Setup)** - Complete setup guide for development environments

#### Ralph LRS (Enterprise)
Ralph LRS is an enterprise-grade Learning Record Store developed by France Université Numérique:

```bash
# Set plugin to ralph
LRS_PLUGIN=ralph
RALPH_ENDPOINT=http://localhost:8100

# Basic Authentication
RALPH_USERNAME=your-username
RALPH_PASSWORD=your-password

# OR OIDC Authentication (preferred for production)
RALPH_OIDC_TOKEN_URL=http://keycloak:8080/auth/realms/test/protocol/openid-connect/token
RALPH_OIDC_CLIENT_ID=ralph
RALPH_OIDC_CLIENT_SECRET=secret
```

- **Authentication Methods**: Ralph plugin automatically detects and uses the appropriate authentication method based on configuration
- **OIDC Support**: Full OpenID Connect support with automatic token management and refresh

#### Veracity Learning (Cloud/Self-hosted)
Veracity Learning is a full-featured xAPI 1.0.3 compliant LRS available as SaaS at lrs.io or self-hosted:

```bash
# Set plugin to veracity
LRS_PLUGIN=veracity
# IMPORTANT: Do NOT include /xapi in the endpoint URL
VERACITY_ENDPOINT=https://your-lrs.lrs.io  
VERACITY_USERNAME=your-access-key-username
VERACITY_PASSWORD=your-access-key-password
```

- **Access Keys Required**: You must create access keys in your Veracity LRS management panel (not your lrs.io account credentials)
- **Endpoint Format**: The plugin automatically handles the `/xapi` path - do not include it in your endpoint URL
- **Full xAPI Support**: Supports all 1,200 requirements of the xAPI specification including digital signatures and attachments
- **Analytics**: Built-in advanced analytics and visualization tools

**⚠️ Important Veracity Setup Notes:**
- Use access key credentials, not your lrs.io account username/password
- Endpoint should be `https://your-lrs.lrs.io` (without `/xapi`)
- Free accounts support up to 100MB storage and ~100,000 statements

#### Custom LRS Integration
The plugin architecture makes it easy to add support for new Learning Record Stores. See our [Plugin Development Guide](https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi/wiki/Plugin-Development) for details.

### AI Client Integration
- **[Claude Desktop Setup](https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi/wiki/Claude-Desktop-Setup)** - Step-by-step guide for connecting Claude Desktop as your AI learning companion
- More client integrations coming soon...

## Future Development

LearnMCP-xAPI is under active development with planned improvements including:

- **Additional LRS Plugins**: Support for more Learning Record Stores including TinCan API, xAPI Wrapper, and enterprise platforms.
- **Enhanced Authentication**: Support for additional authentication methods including JWT, OAuth 2.0, and certificate-based authentication.
- **Expanded Integration Testing**: Comprehensive compatibility testing and setup guides for additional Learning Record Stores and MCP clients.
- **Live Demo Environment**: Interactive demonstration platform where users can test LearnMCP-xAPI functionality without local setup.
- **Educational Assessment Templates**: Pre-built system prompts that enable AI agents to record learning evidence according to specific curriculum standards, evaluation criteria, and educational legislation requirements.
- **Interchangeable Learning Profiles**: Dynamic profile system where AI agents can retrieve assessment criteria and recording formats directly from the MCP server, eliminating the need for manual prompt configuration.

## License

LearnMCP-xAPI is released under the [MIT License](https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi/blob/main/LICENSE). You are free to use, modify, and distribute the code for both commercial and non-commercial purposes.

## Contributing

Contributions to LearnMCP-xAPI are welcome! Whether you're improving the code, enhancing the documentation, or suggesting new features, your input is valuable. Please check out the [CONTRIBUTING.md](https://github.com/DavidLMS/learnmcp-xapi/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md) file for guidelines on how to get started and make your contributions count.

We're particularly interested in:
- **New LRS Plugins**: Implementing support for additional Learning Record Stores using our plugin architecture
- **Authentication Methods**: Adding support for new authentication protocols and security standards
- **Plugin Testing**: Comprehensive testing of existing and new plugin implementations
- **MCP Client Examples**: New MCP client implementations and integration examples
- **Educational Use Cases**: Real-world use case studies and best practices documentation
- **Performance Optimizations**: Improvements to plugin performance and resource utilization
